the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
view additional materials from hundreds
of MIT courses visit MIT open courseware
at
ocw.mit.edu so uh welcome to
6046 my name is shini deas I'm a
professor of computer science uh this is
my 27th year at
MIT I'm uh teaching this class with the
great core staff uh with uh co-
lecturers Eric Dain over
here and uh Nancy Lynch who's over there
and a whole bunch of Tas who you will
meet through the term uh we just signed
up our uh uh last ta yesterday so at
this point even I don't know their
names uh but uh we hope to have a great
semester I I'm very excited to be
teaching this class with Eric and Nancy
I recognize some of you folks from 006
from a year ago uh so hello again and
from other classes uh and so uh let's
get started um I mentioned 006 uh6 is a
prerequisite for this class uh so if uh
by chance you've skip the class uh MIT
or ECS has allowed you to skip that uh
make sure um you check in with us uh to
see that U you are ready for uh 6046
because we will assume that you know the
material and by that I mean uh basic
material on uh data structures classical
algorithms like
sorting uh algorithms for um uh for
dynamic programming or algorithms that
use dynamic programming I should say
algorithms for shortest paths uh Etc uh
6046 itself uh we're going to run this
course uh pretty much off the Stellar
website uh in the sense that uh that'll
be your uh One-Stop shop for getting
everything including uh lecture handouts
uh problem sets turning in your problem
sets uh
Etc and uh I should mention that uh this
course is being taped uh for open
courseware and uh while it'll take a
little bit of time for the videos uh to
be put online uh we hope to do that uh
perhaps in uh in clumps uh before uh uh
the exams the the quizzes that you will
have as we have to have in uh in our
class uh so let me uh just say a couple
more things about uh Logistics and then
we'll get started with the technical
content uh as I mentioned uh we're going
to be running this course of Stellar uh
please sign up for a registration
section by going to the Stellar website
and choosing a section that works for
your schedule uh sections go from 10
a.m. all the way to uh 300 p.m. I think
uh and uh uh We've placed a limit on uh
the number of students per section be
want the sections to be manageable in
size but there's plenty of room for
everybody and uh the schedule
flexibility should allow you to uh
choose a section uh pretty easily uh we
have a course information document and
an objectives document on the website
that has a lot of details on uh the
grading policy the collaboration policy
Etc please read it very carefully uh
from the first page all the way to the
end and I will mention one thing that uh
you should be uh careful about uh which
is that uh while problem sets are only
uh 30% of the grade I we do require you
to attempt the problems and there's
actually a penalty associated with not
attempting problems and not turning
problem sets in that is way more than
30% right so keep that in mind and uh
please read the collaboration policy uh
as well as the grading policy carefully
and uh feel free to ask us questions uh
you can ask us questions anonymously uh
through Piaza or you could suddenly send
us email all the information is on
Stellar so that's all I really had to
say uh about course Logistics um let me
tell you a little bit about U how the
content of this course is
structured um we have uh several modules
and uh Eric Nancy and I will be
uh in charge of each of these different
modules as the term goes on our very
first module um is uh going to start
really next time today is really an
overview lecture
but it's a module on divide and conquer
and uh you uh learned about this divide
and conquer Paradigm in6 or equivalent
classes uh it's breaking up a problem
into smaller problems and uh getting
efficiency that way merge sort is a
classic algorithm that follows the
divide and conquer Paradigm we're going
to take it to a new level and I guess
that's sort of uh the theme of 046 you
know take the material in6 and raise the
stakes a little bit raise the level of
sophistication and you'll see things
like Fast for8 transform uh uh finding
an algorithm for a convex Hull we'll do
that next time that uses the divide and
conquer Paradigm uh we're going to do a
ton of
optimization divide and conquer can
obviously be used for search and also
for
optimization um in particular uh we look
at uh strategies corresponding to uh
greedy algorithms dyra which uh
hopefully you remember shortest path
algorithm uh from 006 is a example of a
greedy algorithm we'll see a bunch of
other examples um and we we'll look at
one today and dynamic programming It's a
Wonderful uh hammer uh algorithmic
hammer that you can apply to a wide
variety of problems certainly to
shortest Pats as well we'll look at it
in many different contexts and then
really quickly
uh Network flow which is uh a problem
that's associated with here's a network
there's capacities associated with the
network uh the capacities could
correspond to uh uh the width of the
roads uh in a uh in in in a highway
system the or the number of lanes the
amount of traffic that can go through
how do I maximize the set of Commodities
or the amount of Commodities that I can
push through the network that it turns
out is again a
a a problem that has many different
applications so it's really a collection
of problems um we're going to spend some
time a little bit today but a little
more than in
66 talking about
intractability so a lot of the
algorithms that we're going to talk
about are efficient in the sense that
they're polinomial time solvable and uh
I of course you know polinomial time
solvable doesn't imply efficiency in the
practical sense so if you have an N
raised to 8 algorithm it's polinomial
time but really it's not something that
you can use on real world problems where
n is relatively large but I generally in
a theoretical computer science class
we'll think about U tractable problems
as being those that have Pol polinomial
time algorithms uh that can solve them
exactly or optimally
but uh intractability then corresponds
to problems that uh at the moment uh we
don't know of a polinomial Time
algorithm to solve them and the best
algorithms we have take worst case
exponential time and so the question is
what happens for those problems and
we'll look at things like approximation
algorithms uh that U can get us in the
case of
optimization problems i' get us uh with
to within a certain fraction of optimal
guaranteed and run in polinomial time so
you can't get the absolute best but you
can get within 10% or we can get within
a factor of two that may be enough for
um a particular instance of a problem or
or a set of instances of a problem and
we'll do a bunch of advanced topics I
think we have distributed algorithms
plan Nancy Works in that area uh and uh
uh uh we'll also talk about cryptography
there's a deep connection between number
Theory algorithms and cryptography that
uh towards the end of the lecture or I
should say towards the end of uh the
course I will look at a little more
closely so so much for overview uh let's
get started with the today's lecture for
real and here's the theme of today's
lecture um
I talked a bit about tractability and
intractability and what is fascinating
about algorithms is that you might see a
problem that has a fairly obvious Pol
polinomial time solution or a linear
time solution then you change it ever so
slightly and the linear time algorithm
doesn't work maybe you can find a cubic
algorithm uh and then you change it a
little more little more for and uh you
end up with something that you can't
find you can't find a polinomial Time
algorithm for you can't prove that uh
the polinomial time algorithm or any
polinomial time algorithm gives you the
optimal solution in all cases and and
then you go off into complexity Theory
uh you maybe discover that uh or show
that this Al this problem is NP complete
and now you're in the intractability
domain so very small changes
in problem
statements can end up
with very different situations from a
standpoint of algorithm complexity and
so that's really what I want
to point out to you in some
detail with a concrete
example so I want to get a little bit
pedantic here with respect to
intractability and tractability uh
you've
seen I think these terms before in the
one lecture
in6 uh but we'll go over this in some
detail today and more later on in this
semester but for now uh let's recall
some uh basic terminology associated
with tractability and intract ility or
complexity Theory broadly speaking
capital P is the class of
problems
solvable in polinomial
time and think of that as Big O N raised
to K for
some constant
K now you can have log factors in there
but once you put a big O in there uh
you're good you can always say uh uh or
or n even if it's a logarithmic problem
and bigo lets you be sloppy like that uh
and uh there are many examples of
polinomial time algorithms of course for
interesting problems like shortest paths
so the shortest path problem is order V
Square where V is the number of vertices
in the graph there's algorithms for that
uh you can do a little bit better uh if
you to um uh use fancier data structures
but that's an example
NP is uh another class of problems
that's very interesting uh this is the
class of
problems that are whose
solution is
verifiable in polinomial
time U so an example of a problem in NP
uh that uh
is not known to be in P is the
hamiltonian cycle
problem and the hamiltonian cycle
problem corresponds
to given a directed
graph
find
a simple cycle so you can't repeat
vertices but you need the simple cycle
to
contain each vertex in
v
and
determining whether a given cycle is a
hamiltonian cycle or not is simple you
just uh Traverse the cycle make sure
that you've touched all the vertices
exactly once and you're done clearly
doable in polinomial time so therefore
hamiltonian cycle is an NP
but uh determining whether a graph has a
hamiltonian cycle or not is a is a hard
problem and
U in
particular uh the notion of NP
completeness
um is something that U defines the level
of
intractability
for NP the NP complete problems are the
hardest problems in NP and hamiltonian
cycle is one of them if you can
solve any NP complete problem in
polinomial time you can solve all
problems in NP in polom time so that's
what I meant by saying that NP complete
problems are in some sense the hardest
problems in NP because solving one of
them gives you everything so the
definition of NP completeness is that
the problem is in
NP and is as
hard an informal definition
as any problem in
NP
and so hamiltonian
cycle is an NP complete problem
satisfiability is an NP complete problem
and there's a whole bunch of them so
going back to our theme Here what I want
to show you is how for an interval
scheduling problem that I'll Define in a
couple of minutes how we move
from linear time therefore p
to something that's still in P but it's
a little more complicated if I change
the constraints of a problem a little
bit and finally if I add more
constraints to the problem generalize it
and you can think of it as adding
constraints or general generalizing the
problem uh you you get with small
changes to something that becomes NP
complete right so this is something that
algorithm designers have to keep in mind
because uh before you go off and try to
design an algorithm for a problem you'd
like to know where in the Spectrum your
problem resides and uh in order to do
that uh you need to understand algorithm
paradigms obviously and be able to apply
them but you also have to understand
reductions where you can try and
translate one problem to another and if
you can do that and U the first problem
um is is is is known to be hard then you
can make arguments about the hardness of
the of your problem so these are the
kinds of things that we'll touch upon
today the an analysis of of of an
algorithm the design of an algorithm and
also uh the complexity analysis of an
algorithm which may not just be an asmic
well this is order n cubed or order n
square but more in the realm of NP
completeness as well
okay so so so much for context Let's uh
dive into our interval scheduling
problem
which is something that you can imagine
doing for
classes uh tasks you know particular
schedule during a day know life in
general uh and in general setting we
have resources and
requests
and we're going to have a single
resource for our first version of the
problem and our requests
are going to be 1 through n and we can
think of these requests as requiring
time corresponding to the resource so
the request is for the resource and you
want time on the resource maybe it's
computation time maybe it's your time I
could be anything um each of these press
corresponds to an interval of time and
that's where the name comes from SI is
the start
time
fi is the finish
time and we're going to say si is
strictly less than
fi okay so I didn't put less than or
equal to there because I want these
requests to be non-null nonzero so
otherwise they're uninteresting and
we're going to have a start time and
we're going to have an end time and
they're not equal so that's
uh the first part of the specification
of the problem and then the second part
uh which
is intuitive is that two requests we
have a single resource here remember um
I and
J are considered to be
compatible which means you can satisfy
both these requests they're compatible
incompatible requests you can't satisfy
with your single resource
simultaneously provided they uh don't
overlap and an overlapping condition
might be that
fi is less than or equal to
SJ
and R
FJ less than equal to SI so again I put
less than or equal to here which is um
important to spend uh a minute on what
I'm saying here that in in this context
is that I really have um open-ended
intervals on the on the right hand side
corresponding to the uh fi so
pictorially you could look at it this
way let's say I
have intervals like
this so this is interval number one
that's interval number two right here I
have S of
one out here F of one out here s of two
out here and F of two out here so this
is s uh F of one for that that and S of2
for this I'm allowing S of2 and F of one
to be exactly equal and I
still agree that these two are
compatible requests okay so this is just
I guess it's terminology it's uh it's
it's it's our definition of
compatibility
so you can imagine now an optimization
problem
that is associated with interval
scheduling where in a different example
I have this interval corresponding to S1
and F1 I might
have a different interval here
corresponding to two then corresponding
to three and then maybe I got four
here
five and six right so those are my six
intervals corresponding to my input I
have a single resource I've just drawn
out in a two-dimensional form the six
different requests that I have the six
different intervals intervals and
requests are
synonyms uh and my goal here and it's
kind of obvious in this example is
to
select a compatible
[Applause]
subset of
requests or
intervals that is of maximum
size and I'd like to do this
efficiently so we'll always consider
efficiency here but in terms of the
specification of the problem as opposed
to a requirement on the the complexity
of the algorithm I I want maximum size
for this subset so as I showed you or I
mentioned earlier uh in this
case it is clear from uh the drawing
that I put up there that the maximum
size for that six request example that I
have is three okay so that's the setup
now we're going to spend the next few
minutes talking about uh a greedy
strategy for solving this particular
problem we don't know if the greedy
strategy is going
to always produce the maximum size or
not in fact it depends on the
particular greedy heuristic the the
selection heuristic that a greedy
algorithm uses
so that's going to be important and
we'll take a look and hopefully you can
suggest some at uh a few different
greedy
heuristics but my claim overall claim
that I'm going to have to spend a bunch
of time here justifying and eventually
proving is that we can
solve this
problem
using a greedy Al
now what is a greedy algorithm you've
seen some examples um as the name
implies it's something that's
uh myopic it's doesn't look ahead it
looks to
maximize the the very first thing that
you can maximize uh it uh it
says you traffic is a good example uh
don't let anybody cut in front of you
uh you got some room up there you know
get up there
as generally people um are greedy when
it comes to uh you know getting to work
uh trying to uh minimize the time in
this case on the time that they spend on
the road but uh we've had other examples
uh for example when you uh look at
interval scheduling uh you might say I'm
going to pick uh uh the smallest request
and I'm going to pick the smallest
request first and I'm going to try and
collect together as many requests as
possible and if the requests are small
in the sense that SI and fi for the two
requests are uh close to each other then
maybe that's the best strategy right so
that's an example of uh a greedy
strategy for our particular example but
just
to give you a slightly better definition
of of greedy then what I've said so
far a greedy algorithm is
uh myopic
algorithm that does two things it
processes the
input one piece at a time
with no apparent look
ahead so what happens is that read
algorithms are typically quite
efficient um what you end up doing is um
looking at a small part of the problem
instance and deciding what to do uh when
once you've done that uh then you're in
a situation where the problem has gotten
a little bit simpler because you've
already solved part of it and then you
move
on so what would a template for a greedy
algorithm look like for our interval
scheduling
problem here's here's a template that
hopefully puts it all together and gives
you a a good sense of what I mean by
greedy at least in this
context
so before we even get into
particulars of uh selection
strategies let me give you a template
for greedy interval
scheduling so step one use a simple
rule to select a
request
and once you do
that if you've selected a particular
request let's say you've selected
one what happens
now once you've selected
one well you're done you can select two
you can select three you can't select
four you can select five you can select
six right so if you selected one in this
case uh your done but we have to codify
that in a step here and what that means
is that we have to reject all
requests that are
incompatible with
I okay and at this point because we've
rejected a bunch of requests our problem
got
smaller okay and
so you now
have a smaller problem and you just
repeat go back to step one until all
requests are
processed right so that's a classical
template for a greedy
algorithm uh you just
go through these really simple steps and
the reason this is a template is because
I haven't specified a particular Rule
and so it's not quite
an algorithm that you can code yet
because we need a
rule
so with all of that context let me ask
you uh what is a rule
that you think would work well for an
interval scheduling problem yeah go
ahead one with the select one with the
earliest finish time all right well I
did not want that
answer but now that uh you've given me
the answer I have to do something about
this right so I want a different answer
but uh so we'll go to a different person
but before I do that um let me uh uh uh
reward you for that answer I did not
want um with a a limited edition
frisbee okay all right you need to stand
up because uh I don't want to take
people's heads off yeah sorry right so
here you go all right
good so people do uh people do cookies
and Candy I think uh Eric Nancy and I
are
cooler so we do
frisbee okay all right good so uh the
fact of the matter was that uh this
class was scheduled for 9:30 to
11: on Tuesdays and Thursdays that's
when we decided to do
frisbees uh and then it got shifted over
to 11 to 12:30 but then we bought all
these frisbees so we said whatever right
it's not like we could use all of them
all right good so I don't like that
answer uh uh and uh I want a different
one give me give me another one yeah go
ahead I'm
sorry iterate through in numerical order
is that going to
work and what's an example where it
didn't work the one right there right
right should I get her of
frisbee we should I'm going to be
generous at the beginning you can just
right but that's an answer I liked yeah
oh there you
go
so uh iterate through a numeric order
isn't going to work this is a great
example right right there right uh um
give me another
one I'm going to run out of frisbee
right here over there yeah um try the
one with the shortest time ah try the
one with the shortest time okay so um so
the shortest time in this case might be
this one right uh the shortest time
might be this one and hey may that might
work in this case because you pick this
one which is the shortest or maybe it's
five which is the shortest uh either way
you could get two five and six you know
looking at this picture seems to work uh
maybe four five and six uh if you pick
five first Etc right I'll give you a
frisbee if you can take that same
algorithm and give me a counter
example let's say you have two requests
which don't and then there's there's one
right in the middle exactly right yeah
so uh let's see where what do I do oh
here so pict tally you can look at
this and you can actually figure out
whether your heuristic works or not but
this is I think what you were thinking
about there you go
right so you get
one so that clearly doesn't work so this
one was
smallest doesn't work uh the suggestion
here was uh numeric
doesn't
work
um here's one that
uh might actually
work uh for each
request find the number of incompatible
requests so you got a request you can
always intersect the other requests with
it and decide whether the the the second
request is compatible or not right and
you do this for every other request and
you can collect together uh numbers
associated with how many incompatible
requests a particular request has and
you say well uh let me use that as a
heuristic right so each request find
number of incompatible requests and
select the
one with the
minimum number of
incompatibles
right so just to be clear in this case
you would not select one uh because
clearly one is incompatible with every
other request right so that clearly is
not numeric order in this case you would
not select this one because it's
incompatible with this one and that one
right so you select the one which has
the minimum number of incompatibles
right so do you think this is going to
produce the the correct answer the
maximum answer in every possible
case no who said
no well anybody who said no should give
me a counter example yeah go go for it
if the one that it selects has mutually
incompatible collection of intervals
with right so that's that's a good
thought uh um we'll have to concretize
that and uh I think this particular
example does exactly what you said um
which is
instantiates your U notion of mutual
incompatibility so here's here's an
example where I have something it's a
little more complicated as you can see
this is a pretty good heuristic it's not
perfect as you can see from this
example where I have
something like
this so if you look at
this what I have here is I have just a
bunch of
requests uh which have uh this is
incompatible with this and that and
these two so clearly a lot of
incompatibilities for these lot of
incompatibilities for these which is the
minimum the one in here right but you
what happens if you select that well
clearly you don't get this solution
which is optimal right the one on
top right so this is a bad
selection so this doesn't work either
okay here you
go so as it turns out uh the reason I
didn't like that first answer was it was
it was correct uh it it's actually a a
beautiful heuristic earliest finish
time is a huris uh that is well it's not
really a heuristic in the sense that if
you use that selection rule uh then it
works
in every
case uh in every case it's going to get
you the maximum number okay earliest
finish time right
so what does that mean well it just
means that I'm going to
scan the F of I associated with the list
of requests that I have and I'm going to
pick the one that is
minimum minimum ffi means earliest
finish time right now you can just step
back and I'm not going to do this for
every diagram that I have up here but
look at every example that I've put up
apply the selection rule associated with
earliest finish
time and you'll see that it works and
gets you the maximum number for
example uh over
here this has the earliest finish time
okay
not this not this it's over here so you
pick that and then you use the the
greedy algorithm step two to eliminate
all of the intervals that are
incompatible so these go away right once
this goes away this one has the earliest
finish time right and so on and so forth
so this is something that you can prove
through examples right that's not really
a good notion but you can prove to
yourself uh using examples and this is
where I I guess the essence of essence
of 6046 to some extent 006 uh comes into
play we will have to prove beyond a
shadow of a
doubt using mathematical rigor that the
earliest finish
time selection rule always gives
the maximum number of requests okay and
we're going to do that it's going to
take us a little bit of time but that's
the kind of thing you will be expected
to do and you'll see a lot of in
okay so everyone by by earliest finish
time y go
ahead
yeah
uh well then you get one for if there's
only two requests and uh your maximum
number is one so you pick it doesn't
matter it's not like you want efficiency
of your resource in this particular case
we will look at uh cases where uh you
might have an extra consideration
associated with your problem which
changes the problem that says I want my
resource to be maximally utilized if you
do that then this doesn't work and
that's exactly it's a great question
asked uh but I did say that uh uh that
we were going to uh look at the theme
here uh which I don't have anymore but
of how problems changes change
algorithms right and so that's a problem
change okay you got
question
right
inters okay so you're are you claiming
that there's going to be a counter
example to earliest finish time all
right I would write it down on a sheet
of paper right uh and get me a concrete
example and you can just slide it by and
if you get that before I finish my proof
right uh you win okay uh um uh so I
would write it down right just write it
down right so good all right so this is
a contest now
okay all right so we're going to try and
prove
this so uh there's many ways you could
prove things and I mean prove things
properly uh I don't know if you've read
the old
6042 uh proof techniques that are
invalid you know which is things like
proof by
intimidation um you know proof uh
because the lecturer said so you know
things like that uh this is going to be
a classical proof technique it's going
to be a proof by induction right we're
going to go into it in some detail um
later on in the term we're going to put
out uh sketches of proofs we're going to
be skipping steps in lecture uh that are
obvious uh or maybe not so obvious but
if you paid attention uh then uh you can
infer uh the middle step for example and
so we'll be doing uh proof sketches
right right and proof sketches are not
sketchy proofs okay so uh keep that in
mind but this particular proof that
we're going to do I'm going to put in
all the steps because it's our first one
okay and so what we're going to do here
is prove a
claim and the claim is
simply
that oops this is
not writing very
well what is going on
here
okay back to the
white given a
list of interval
L are greedy
algorithm with earliest finish
time
produces
Kar
intervals where Kar is minimum
so that's what we'd like to
prove sorry what
happened oh
right good
point
Max what we're going to do is prove this
by induction and it's going to be
induction on K
star and so the base
case is almost always with induction
proofs trivial and it's similar here as
well and in the base case
if you have a single interval in your
list then obviously that's a trivial
example but what I'm saying here for the
base case is slightly different it says
that the optimal solution has a single
interval right and so now if your
problem has one interval or two
intervals or three intervals you can
always pick one and it's clearly going
to be a valid schedule because you don't
have to check compatibility and so the
base case is Trivial even in the case
where we're not talking about necess not
we're not talking just of intervals that
have cardinality one but the optimal
schedule has cardinality one so that's a
trivial
case so the hard work of course in
uh induction proves
this assuming the hypothesis and proving
the n + one or in this case the K star +
one k
and that's what we'll have to work
on so let's say
that the
claim
holds
for K
star
and we are
given a
list of intervals
whose optimal
schedule is Kar +
one it
has Kar + one intervals in the optimal
schedule so L may be some large number
capital L maybe in the hundreds and K
star maybe 10 what have you they they're
different I want to point that out so
our optimal schedule we're going to
write out as as
this uh s
star so usually we use star for optimal
in 046 and it's got uh K star + one
entries and those entries look like uh s
uh F in uh pairs so I'm going to be
using the subscript
J1 through uh J Kar +
one
to denote these uh these intervals so
the first one is sj1 fj1 that's an
interval that's been selected and is
part of our optimal solution and then if
we keep going and we
have um
SJ K star + 1 comma f j
Kar + one right so
um no getting away from subscripts here
in
046 so that's
our uh uh that's that's what we have in
terms of this is what the optimal
schedule list it's got size K star of
course what we have to show is that the
greedy
algorithm with the earliest finish time
is going to produce something that is K
star + one in size and so that's the
that's the hard part we can assume the
inductive hypothesis and we'll have to
do that but there's a couple of steps in
between right
so let's say that what we have
is S1 through
K is what the greedy algorithm produces
with the earliest finish time so I'm
going to write that
down s i k f i
k right so notice I've have K here and K
and K
star at this
point are not
comparable I'm just making a statement
that I took um this
particular problem that has K star + one
in terms of its uh optimal solution size
and for that problem I have K intervals
that are produced by the earliest finish
time greedy heuristic okay and so that's
why the subscripts
here are different well I have i1 here
and ik and then over here I have the JS
right so that these intervals are
different um if I look at u f of I plus
F of i1 and if I look at F
of
J1 what can I say about F of i1 and F of
J1 is there a relationship between F of
i1 and F of
J1 they're equal do they have to be
equal
yeah L equal less than equal to exactly
right so they're they're less than equal
to uh it's possible that uh you might
end up with a different optimal solution
uh that uh doesn't uh use the earliest
finish time we think earliest finish
time is optimal at this point we haven't
proven it yet but it's quite possible
that you may have other solutions that
are optimal that aren't necessarily the
ones that earliest finish time gives you
right so that's really why the less than
or equal to is important
here um now what I'm going to do is
create a schedule s star
star that essentially is going to be
taking s star and pulling out the
first interval from s star and
substituting it with the first interval
from my greedy algorithms schedule so
I'm just going to replace that and so s
star star is um s
i1
f
J1 and then I'm going to be going back
to
sj2 fj2 because I'm going back to S
star and all the other ones are are
coming from s star so they're going to
be s j k star +
one
uh comma
f j k
star +
one okay so I just did a little
substitution there um associated with uh
the the optimal solution and I stuck in
part of the greedy algorithm solution in
fact the very first schedule
okay oh this should be uh I I want thank
you
y good
so we got a couple of things to do a
couple of observations to make and we're
going to be able
to
prove some relationship between K and K
star that is going to give us our the
proof for our
claim
so clearly s
star is also
optimal all I've done is taken one
interval out and replaced it with
another one hasn't changed the size it
goes up to K star + one so s star is
also optimal s star is optimal s double
star is
optimal now I'm going to
Define l
Prime as the set of
intervals with s of I greater than or
equal to F of
i1 right so what is L Prime well L Prime
is what happens in the second step of
the greedy
algorithm where in the second step of
the greedy algorithm once I've selected
this particular interval and I've pulled
it in I have to reject all of the other
intervals that are incomp compatible
with this one right so I'm going to have
to take only those intervals for which s
ofi is greater than or equal to F of i1
because uh those
are those are the ones that are
compatible okay so that's what L Prime
is
and I'm going to be able to say that
since
s double
star is op
for
l
s double star
2 to Kar +
1 is optimal for L
Prime right so I'm making a statement
about this optimal solution I know
that's optimal and basically what I'm
saying is subset sets of the optimal
solution are going to have to be optimal
because if that's not the case I could
uh always
substitute the something better and
shrink the size of
the the K Star Plus One optimal solution
which obviously would be a contradiction
okay
so s double star is going to is optimal
for L and therefore s star 2 through K
star + 1 is optimal for L Prime right
everybody buy that y
good and so what this means of course is
that the optimal
schedule for L
Prime has
Kar
size I'm starting with two I've taken
away one so now I have L Prime which is
a smaller problem now you see where the
proof is headed um if you didn't already
uh I have a smaller problem which is L
Prime clearly it's got fewer requests
and I I have constructed an optimal
schedule for that problem by pulling it
out of the original optimal schedule I
was given and that size of that optimal
schedule is Kar right um and now I get
to invoke my inductive hypoth is because
my inductive
hypothesis says that this claim that I
have up there holds for any set of
problems that have an optimal schedule
of size K Star right that's what the
inductive hypothesis gives me and so by
the inductive
hypothesis
when I
run the greedy
algorithm on L
Prime I'm going to
get a schedule of size case
star
right now can you tell me based on what
you see on the board by
construction when I run the greedy
algorithm what am I getting on
lar by construction when I run the
greedy algorithm on L uh I'm sorry L
Prime there's too many uh superscripts
here when I when I run the greedy
algorithm on L Prime what do I
get
someone
yeah exactly right I get um everything
from the the second thing here all the
way to the nend right because that's
exactly what the greedy algorithm does
remember the greedy algorithm picked si1
fi1 and then rejected all requests that
were incompatible and and then moved on
then you rejected all requests that were
incompatible here you got exactly L
Prime
and uh by construction uh the greedy
algorithm should have given me uh all
the way from si2 to uh SI ik right thank
you
so by
construction the
greedy on L
Prime gives
S2 to K right and what is the size of
this 2 to K gives me a size of K minus
one right this is K minus
one
so so if I put the if I put these two
things
together what what do I have what is the
next step I have the inductive
hypothesis
giving me a fact I have the construction
giving me something now I can relate K
and K star what's the
relationship K star is equal to K minus
one right do people see
that right so size K star which
is K minus one right so what that means
is um given that s
2K is of size K star it means that
s1k is of size K star + one which uh is
exactly what I want that's uh optimal
because I said in the beginning that we
had K star + one in our uh inductive
hypothesis case as being the optimal
solution so this last step here um is
all you need to to argue now that uh
um s of 1K going back up here um this is
optimal
because k equal K star + 1
right there you
go so so that's the kind of argument
that you'd like have to make um in order
to prove something like this in 046 and
what you'll see in your problem sets uh
uh including the one that's going to
come out on Thursday is a different uh
problem that you'd have to have approv
for a greedy algorithm for I forget
exactly what technique you'll have to
use there perhaps induction perhaps
contradiction and these are the kinds of
things that uh get you to the point
where you've analyzed the correctness of
algorithms uh not just the fact that
you're getting a valid schedule but
you're getting a valid uh maximum
schedule in terms of the maximum number
of requests okay any questions about
this do people buy the
proof yep good um so that was greedy for
a particular problem I told you that the
theme of our lecture here was uh
changing the problem and uh
getting
different different algorithms that had
different
complexities so let's go ahead and do
that so for the rest of this uh lecture
we'll just take a look at different
kinds of problems and talk a little more
superficially about uh what the problem
complexities are and so one thing that
might come to mind is that you'd like to
do weighted interval
scheduling and
what happens here is each
request has
weight
wi and what we want to do is
schedule a subset of
requests with maximum weight so
previously it was just all weights were
one so maximum cut ality was what we
wanted but now we want to schedule a
subset of requests with maximum weight
um someone give
me an argument as to whether the greedy
algorithm earliest finish time first is
optimal for this weighted case or give
me a counter
example yeah uh go
ahead
right exactly exactly right all right I
owe you one too you
go um so it's a fairly trivial example
all you do
is W = 1 W =
1 wal 3 right so there you go um so
clearly the earliest finish time would
pick this one and then this one which is
fine you get two of these but this was
important you know this is I don't know
sleep party
6046 right so there you go so the weight
is I should make that uh infinity
right right most important thing in the
world at least for the next uh 6
months um so uh how does it work
now so it turns out at the
greedy strategy the template that I had
uh fails okay uh there's nothing that
exists on this planet that at least I
know of uh where you can have a simple
rule and use that template to get the
optimum solution in this case maximum
weight solution
for every problem instance right so that
template just fails okay
um what other programming Paradigm do
you think would be useful
here yeah go ahead DP right so you you
want to take a stab at uh a potential DP
solution here yeah
either or discard it and
yeah that's that's the perfect divide
and conquer and then when you include it
what do you have to do
elim right how many sub problems do you
think there are I I want to make you
earn your Frisbee
right
probably number
of number inters you have well that's a
that's a number of sub sets that you
have uh so you have n intervals then you
have two rais to n subsets right but
remember you want to go uh you know you
want to be smarter than that right you
want to be a little bit smarter than
that uh and uh uh so here you get a FR
be anyway no not anyway here you
go right um so uh anybody else uh so
what I want to use uh is dynamic
programming we've established that right
I want to use Dynamic program in and
with dynamic programming you have some
experience with that
in6 uh the name of the game is to figure
out what the sub problems are right um
the sub problems are kind of going to
look like a collection of requests I
mean there's no two things about it
they're going to be a collection of
requests right and so uh the challenge
here is not to go to the 2 ra to n okay
because 2 ra to n is bad right um for uh
we want efficiency so we have to have a
polinomial number of sub problems so
someone who hasn't answered yeah go
ahead
so so you're looking at every pairs of I
and JS uh and uh uh well not all of them
are going to be valid they won't be
intervals associated with that right but
you know that's a that's that's a
reasonable start right someone
else uh someone who hasn't answered yeah
back there um you could go the best from
the start to some point answer there
those ah best from the start to any
given point all right well you got you
got close uh Michael there you go uh you
need to stand
up oh bad throw that's a bad throw I got
to
practice okay so um as you can see with
dynamic programming the challenge is to
figure out what the sub problems are uh
the fact of the matter is that there's
going to be many different uh possible
algorithms that are all DP for this
weighted problem there's at least two
interesting ones we're going to do a
simple one which is based on the answer
that uh the gentleman just here just
gave uh but uh it turns out you can be a
little smarter than that and uh most
likely you'll hear that the smarter way
in the section okay but let's do the
simple one because that's all I have
time here for and the key is to define
the sub problems and then once you do
that uh the actual recursion ends up
being a fairly straightforward and
intuitive
step so let's
uh look
at
dynamic programming one particular way
of solving this problem using the DP
Paradigm so what I'm going to do is
Define sub problems R
star so R is the total number of
requests that we
have and the sub problems are going to
correspond to I'm going to pick request
J belonging to R such
that oh I'm sorry this was R of x
X um such that s SJ is greater than or
equal to
X right so um what I'm doing here is um
given a particular X I can always shrink
the number of requests that I have based
on this rule okay and then you might ask
you know what is X and now you can apply
the
same subsetting
property by choosing the X's to
be the finishing times of all of the
other
requests right so uh x equals F ofi so
what this means
is um when I put uh F ofi over here it
means all of the requests that come
after the I request finished are part of
R of fi so R of fi would simply
be
requests
later than F of I okay and there's
something subtle here that I want to
point out which is R of fi is not the
set of requests that are compatible with
the I request
okay it's it's not exactly that it's the
set of requests that are later than F
ofi okay so keep that in mind because
what happens here is we're going to
solve this problem uh step by step we're
going to construct the dynamic
programming solution um
essentially by picking a request and
then just like in the greedy case and
then picking the request that comes
after that so if we're going to pick
pick an early request and then we're
going to subset the solution pick the
next one just like we did with the
greedy um and so uh the sub problems
that we will actually solve potentially
bottom up if we doing recursion um are
going to correspond to a set of requests
that come later than the
particular subset that we're looking at
which is defined by a particular
interval all right so requests that are
later than ffi not necessarily all of
the requests that are compatible with
the I
request and so if you do
that then the number of sub problems
here are small n where n is the number
of requests so if n is
the number of requests in the original
problem the number of sub
problems
equals n because all I do is plug in an
appropriate I find the F ofi for it and
generate the r of f ofi for each of
those so there's going to be n of those
sub
problems
and we're going to
solve each sub problem
once and then
memorize
and so the work that we have to do is uh
the basic rule corresponding to the
complexity of a DP which is number of
sub
problems
times the
time to
solve um each sub problem or a single
sub
problem
and this
assumes order one
for uh
lookups so you can you can think of the
recursive calls as being order
one because you're assuming you're doing
memorization okay so I haven't really
told you anything here that uh you
haven't seen in6 and likely applied
bunch of times um over here we've just
defined what our sub problems are for
our particular DP and we argued that the
number of sub problems that are
associated with this particular choice
of of sub problems corresponds to n if
you have n requests in the original
problem instance that you're
given so the last thing that we have to
do here to solve our DP is of course to
write our recursion out
and to convince ourselves that this
actually all works
out and let's do
that and so what we have here
is our DP
guessing and we're going to
try each
request
I and as a possible first
request right and so that's where this
works you might be thinking boy I mean
this R of fi looks a little strange why
doesn't it include all of the requests
that are compatible with the with the
with the I request I mean I'm somehow
shrinking my my subsequent problem size
if I'm ignoring some requests that are
earlier that really should be part of
the or are part of the compatible set
but they're not part of the RF fi set
right and so some of you may be thinking
that well the reason this is going to
work out is because we're going to
construct our solution as I said before
from the beginning to the end so we're
going to try each request as a possible
first request okay so even though this
request might be in our chart you know
all the way to the right uh it might
have a huge weight okay and so I'm going
to have to try that out as my first
selection and when I try that out as my
first selection then the definition of
my sub problem says that this will work
I only have to look at requests that
come later than that because the ones
that came earlier I've tried them out
too okay so that's something that you
need to keep in mind I in order to argue
correctness of this recursion that I'm
going to write out now
and so the
recursion and I have opt
R what is the first thing that I'm going
to have on the right hand side of this
recursive formulation what uh
mathematical construct am I going to
have to do here when I when you see
something like guessing and seeing
something like try each request is a
possible first what mathematical
construct am I going to have to put up
here Max who said
max
no one wants to take credit for Max it's
Max right so I'm going to have
Max um 1 less than equal to I less than
or equal to
n and I'm going to um uh someone want to
tell me what the rest of this looks
like someone someone
else couple of Frisbees left
guys what do the rest of this look
like yep
optim uh not one just we have what what
kind of problem do we have here it's not
one
anymore the weight the weight yeah so wi
plus the
optimal uh
R
fi right
okay so we got wi plus optimal of R of
fi okay so and the reason you said one
but I that close enough if it was one
You' use greedy and so that's why we're
in the wi mode and we end up getting
this here so that's it you try every
request as a possible first you
obviously pick that request so it's part
of your weight in terms of your uh the
weight for your solution when you do
that because it was the first request
you get to prune the set of requests
that come later corresponding to um R of
fi that you see here and then you uh go
ahead and simply uh find the optimum for
a smaller problem clearly has a fewer
requests and uh as long as you maximize
over the set of guesses that you've
taken and there's n guesses up at the
top level obviously at the lower levels
you're going to have fewer requests uh
in your R of fi and you'll have
fewer uh iterations of the Max and but
it's n at the top level okay so um one
last
question uh what is the complexity of
what we see
here n square right and the reason is n
square is you simply use you can be very
mechanical about this you you you say if
this was order one I'm doing a Max Over
N items and therefore that's order end
time to solve one sub problem and uh uh
since I have N Sub problems I I get n
time order n which is order n s okay so
um the last thing I will do and I just
have one more minute is H give you a
sense of a small change to uh interval
scheduling that puts us in the NP
complete domain okay so so far we've
just done two problems there's many
others we did interval scheduling there
was greedy linear time weighted interval
scheduling is order and square according
to this particular DP formulation turns
out there's a smarter DP formulation
that runs an order n log end time uh
that uh you'll hear about in section on
Friday uh but still polinomial time um
let's make make one reasonable change to
this which is to say that we may have
multiple
resources and they may be
non-identical right so turns out
everything that we've done kind of
extrapolates very well to um uh to
identical machines even though there's
many identical machines but if you have
non-identical machines what that means
is you have uh resources or machine
that have different uh types so maybe
your your your machines are
T1 to three
TM okay and
um it's uh essentially a situation where
you say uh this particular task can only
be run on this machine or this other
machine some subset of machines so um
you can still have a weight of one for
all requests
but you have something like Q of I
belonging subset of
T is a set of
machines that I runs
on okay that's it that's the change we
make
qfi is going to be specified for each of
the eyes so you could even have two
machines and you could say here's a a
set of requests that could run on both
machines here's a set that only runs on
the first machine and here's another set
that runs on the second machine right
that's a a simple example of this
generalization um if you do this this
problem has been shown to be NP
complete and by that I mean NP complete
problems are decision problems and so
you
say can some specific number number K
less than n
requests P
schedule this decision problem is NP
complete okay and so what happens when
you have NP complete problems well we're
going to have a little module in the
class that deals with intractability
we're going to look at U cases where we
could apply approximation algorithms and
maybe uh in the case of the optimization
problem uh if the optimum uh for this is
K star we'll say that we can get within
10% of K star um the other way is to
just deal with intractability by uh
hoping that your exponential time
algorithm runs in reasonable amount of
time for common cases so in the worst
case uh you uh might end up taking a
long time but you just sort of back off
after an hour and take what you get from
the output of the algorithm but uh in
many cases uh the algorithm might
actually complete uh and they give you
the optimum solution okay so done here
make sure to uh sign up for the
resistration section and see you guys
next
time